The $Free Shen License

_**Terms of Use**_

_By '__**derivative work**__' we understand it as defined by the US copyright
law. We emphasise the following passage from the copyright act of the USA_

_"___Making minor changes or additions of little substance to a preexisting
work will not qualify the work as a new version for copyright purposes.___"_

_By '__**copyright holder**__' we understand Dr Mark Tarver, or, in the event
of his decease, the committee appointed under the terms of his will to
administer his intellectual estate._

_By '__**the software**__' we understand Shen and all the code used to
implement it. We include both the original source code written in Shen, and
the code derived from this code through compilation to other languages._

_By '__**Shen standard**__' we understand the latest standards for Shen laid
down in Lambda Associates by the copyright holder._

_By '__**the user**__' we understand any person or group of persons, whether
organised in a commercial company, cooperative or institution or not, that use
the software. The use of 'he' and 'his' to refer to the user follows English
usage, but makes no special assumptions about gender or plurality._

_**The License**_

_The user is free to produce commercial applications with the software, to
distribute these applications in source or binary form, and to charge monies
for them as he sees fit and in concordance with the laws of the land subject
to the following license._

_1. __The license applies to all the software and all derived software and
must appear on such._

_2. It is illegal to distribute the software without this license attached to
it and use of the software implies agreement with the license as such. It is
illegal for anyone who is not the copyright holder to tamper with or change
the license._

_3. Neither the names of Lambda Associates or the copyright holder may be used
to endorse or promote products built using the software without specific prior
written permission from the copyright holder._

_4. __That possession of this license does not confer on the copyright holder
any special contractual obligation towards the user. That in no event shall
the copyright holder be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special,
exemplary or consequential damages (including but not limited to procurement
of substitute goods or services, loss of use, data, or profits; or business
interruption), however caused and on any theory of liability, whether in
contract, strict liability or tort (including negligence) arising in any way
out of the use of the software, even if advised of the possibility of such
damage. _

_5. It is permitted for the user to change the software, ___for the purpose of
improving performance, correcting an error, or porting to a new platform___,
and distribute the modified version of Shen (hereafter the modified version)
provided the resulting program conforms in all respects to the Shen standard
and is issued under that title. The user must make it clear with his
distribution that he/she is the author of the changes and what these changes
are and why. _

_6. Derived versions of this software in whatever form are subject to the same
restrictions. In particular it is not permitted to make derived copies of this
software which do not conform to the Shen standard or appear under a different
title._

_7. It is permitted to distribute versions of Shen which incorporate
libraries, graphics or other facilities which are not part of the Shen
standard._

The License in Detail

_The user is free to produce commercial applications with the software, to
distribute these applications in source or binary form, and to charge monies
for them as he sees fit and in concordance with the laws of the land subject
to the following license._

That's the $free part. You can write your own Shen software and put your own
license on it and charge what you want and distribute it either as closed or
open source. We'll come back to that.

_1. __The license applies to all the software and all derived software and
must appear on that software._

That means that the license applies to the Shen source code and the Kl source
code which comes with the download. You will see that this code carries a
copyright on the code. The concept of _derivative_ is explained in US law as
follows.

_A derivative work is a work based upon one or more pre-existing works, such
as a translation, musical arrangement, dramatization, fictionalization, motion
picture version, sound recording, art reproduction, abridgment, condensation,
or any other form in which a work may be recast, transformed, or adapted. A
work consisting of editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other
modifications which, as a whole, represent an original work of authorship, is
a derivative work._

To this we add that any computable mapping of the Shen source code and the Kl
source code to another medium i.e. another language; counts as a derivative
work in our understanding, and it is immaterial _whether this mapping is done
by a human being or by a computer_. If you map Shen into Javascript by writing
a compiler, then the resulting Javascript program carries the same license as
the original and that license must appear on the code. If you retitle some of
the functions using a global substitution it is a derivative work. If you copy
it out in copperplate using a quill, it is derivative. In other words, the
message and not the medium is important.

2. _It is illegal to distribute the software without this license attached to
it and use of the software implies agreement with the license as such. It is
illegal for anyone who is not the copyright holder to tamper with or change
the license._

This is basic. You cannot remove this license or change it - only the
copyright holder can do that.

_3. Neither the names of Lambda Associates or the copyright holder may be used
to endorse or promote products built using the software without specific prior
written permission from the copyright holder._

You cannot say_ 'My software is great because Mark Tarver recommends it'_ or
_'Lambda Associates says this is really reliable'_ unless we did actually say
that, and gave you the written permission to use our endorsement. That said,
if you do write something really great in Shen, I'd be happy to endorse it and
for you to use that endorsement.

_4. __That possession of this license does not confer on the copyright holder
any special contractual obligation towards the user. That in no event shall
the copyright holder be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special,
exemplary or consequential damages (including but not limited to procurement
of substitute goods or services, loss of use, data, or profits; or business
interruption), however caused and on any theory of liability, whether in
contract, strict liability or tort (including negligence) arising in any way
out of the use of the software, even if advised of the possibility of such
damage. _

This is the usual disclaimer. It protects us from a lawsuit in case anything
goes wrong with our software. However Shen is based on a design with 20 years
R&D; it has been very thoroughly tested by myself and by the people who have
ported it to other platforms. So in all you are pretty safe here.

_5. It is permitted for the user to change the software, ___for the purpose of
improving performance, correcting an error, or porting to a new platform___,
and distribute the modified version of Shen (hereafter the modified version)
provided the resulting program conforms in all respects to the Shen standard
and is issued under that title and the original license. The user must it
clear with his distribution that he/she is the author of the changes and what
these changes are and why. _

Shen sources are readable for several reasons. The first is that we want to
allow people to read our code and correct mistakes. The second is that people
porting Shen to different OSes and different platforms need open access to the
code to do the porting. The last is we allow people to improve the efficiency
of our code by changing it - _as long as it then still works_ i.e. it conforms
to the spec. You have to put your name on the changes you make, because, in
the event that something goes wrong, we cannot take the moral responsibility
for those changes. It should be obvious (I hope) that optimising a small piece
of code does not change the license or allow you to change the license. The
resulting work is still derivative.

_6. Derived versions of this software in whatever form are subject to the same
restrictions. In particular it is not permitted to make derived copies of this
software which do not conform to the Shen standard or appear under a different
title._

Again this emphasises what we said in explicating 1. This point just says you
cannot evade the license by simply retitling and reselling our code under a
different title e.g. Shine.

_7. It is permitted to distribute versions of Shen which incorporate
libraries, graphics or other facilities which are not part of the Shen
standard._

This means you are free to add things to Shen which are not part of the
standard and you can distribute that work under the Shen title.

The Motivation for Shen and the License

Now let's look at the motivation for this license. The motivation for the
license is the motivation for Shen itself; we set ourselves a goal and
achieved it; we produced a version of Qi which runs uniformly according to
specification, not just under Common Lisp, but under Scheme and Javascript
(and to come Clojure, Python, ...etc). How did we do this?

First, we did it by reducing the instruction set necessary to run Shen to an
absolute minimum, currently (September, 2011), 45 primitive functions. Second
we maintain a rigorous testing and specification for the work we produce and
we make sure that, under whatever the platform Shen appears, Shen runs out of
the box on that platform, according to spec, _without exception_. The motto
for Shen is:

_Write once, run anywhere._

That means that the professional programmer can rely on Shen to work for him
and he can write a Shen program once and move it to CL, Javascript etc, and
(modulo performance) expect it to work. This is very important.

Part of our motivation in maintaining a tight spec and a reliable platform is
to hold the Shen community together so that _we do not splinter our resources
on multiple incompatible forks_. We do not want multiple incompatible dialects
of Shen, multiple compilers, multiple incompatible libraries. We want $free
readable libraries that work for all of us and libraries we can pick up and
use without worrying about compatibility. Hence the production of derivative
non-conforming programs from our source, whether called Shen, Shin, Shine or
Shoo, is barred by the license. To give up on this is to give up on the
motivation for Shen.

We are therefore not open source. Generally, the diversity and freedom to fork
which was lauded as a strength of open source, has turned into the major
weakness of Linux. This OS has been burdened by multiple forks, multiple
distros, multiple apps for doing the same thing to the point where essentially
the same work has been redone over and over again by different groups. The
resultant wastage of effort has been huge and the result has been lack of
cross platform usability, a lack of uniformity in the user interface, a
reliance on complex dependencies and too often, software that reflects the
scattering of human resources by displaying broken functionality. Even Linux
fans are seeing this. This in turn has given Linux a bad name. We want to
avoid all that.

The analogy that we would like people to carry with them is that of a spinning
wheel. The freedom of the wheel to spin depends on there being a fixed hub
which at its theoretical geometrical centre point shows zero motion. Our
adherence to standards and discipline as system programmers allows you, the
applications programmer, to be confident of basing your work on ours.

Some Questions

There are probably more questions than we can anticipate; hence this list will
grow as people ask them. Here are a few obvious ones.

1. _Is Shen subject to something like GPL? For instance, if I distribute Shen
source with my application, do I have to make my code readable or $free?_

No, any code you write using Shen is _your _code. If it is really an
application running on top of our code and not a derivative of our code, then
you can do what you want with it. We do not covet your work.

2. _Suppose I write a compiler for Shen in C and I want to sell it as closed
source. Can I? Even if I use your code?_

Yes; there is nothing to stop you writing a superfast compiler for Shen and
selling it to people. As long as it meets the language specification, we
really don't mind.

3. _Suppose I move Shen to another platform and make an error, breaking the
spec, what happens?_

Generally you would want to avoid breaking the spec, but supposing that you
did, you would first have to issue an announcement to your users explaining
there was a bug. Second, you would have to fix it. If you could not fix it,
you would have to withdraw it.

4. _Suppose I wanted to distribute some enhanced version of Shen e.g. with a
graphics tool or special editor. Would my work be bound by the Shen license?_

Again the code you write which rides on the top of our code is _not_ bound by
our license, this is yours. And there is nothing to say that you cannot add
extra features, bells and whistles, to your version of Shen; but what you
cannot do is add a feature than causes Shen to fail to execute according to
spec. And you cannot simply get round this by retitling the resultant
implementation by another name.

5. _Can I change Shen source and sell it as closed source?_

Yes; it's probably not a very sound business proposition because we keep our
sources readable. But you could do that provided the result still ran
according to spec under the same name.

6. _Can I sell support and services to Shen?_

Of course.

7. _Will the library appear under the same license that Shen uses?_

No; we are pretty much _laissez faire_ with respect to applications written in
Shen. We don't insist on any license restrictions on what appears in the
library. However if you want to make a for-money closed source contribution to
the library and you wanted us to mount it on our website, you would have to
negotiate a fee for us giving it space and advertising. If you wanted to make
it open source, under BSD or MIT for instance, then we'd certainly put it up -
no fee. _Generally we are into open source for the library_, because the
motivation for constraint is less than for the kernel on which everything
depends and we want people to be able to use this stuff freely. We are into
experimentation at this level.

8. _Will the standard for Shen remain the same?_

No; no language standard remains static. We need to evolve standards for
calling foreign processes etc.; so we cannot freeze our work to what we have
achieved in 2011.

9. _So does this mean that I could write a program in Shen in 2011 and find it
does not work in 2013?_

Almost certainly not. We don't intend to remove or change what we have already
done. Changes will be incremental - aimed at increasing the power of the
language, giving users the ability to do new things, not taking away their
ability to do old things.

10. _If I produced my version of Shen, and it conformed to your standard in
2011, and then you added a new feature, would I be required to update my
implementation?_

Yes; but note that we always make our code readable and documented, we support
our system programmers, and we are conservative in making changes. for one
thing, we don't want to make work for ourselves and our colleagues.

11. _Suppose I created a plugin for Shen which was really cool e.g. a feature
for enabling concurrency. Suppose you changed the standard for Shen to include
a version of concurrency that made my work contravene the new standard. What
would happen?_

We cannot do that. We cannot make a feature created by somebody
_retrospectively_ illegal by changing the standard in such a way that that
feature is out of bounds. What we would do in that event, is make sure that
our version of concurrency was invoked in such way as not to be inconsistent
with the existence of your version under Shen. This is simple to do e.g. use
different identifiers. Of course, if your feature was that cool you might want
to offer it as part of the new standard. But that would be your choice.

12. _I notice the copyright holder and designer is Mark Tarver. What happens
to the project if something happens to him?_

After 2011, the work on Shen becomes more open and there will be an advisory
committee on the development of Shen. Though Mark Tarver occupies the position
of BDFL and has the final word, should something happen to him - death or
incapacity; then executive decision, control of Lambda Associates, qilang and
copyright will pass to the committee which will collectively assume the
position of BDFL.

13. _Could you tell me more about the committee?_

The committee is composed of people with technical knowledge that is useful to
the development of Shen and people who have made a significant technical
contribution - such as moving Shen to another platform or developing some
significant systems application. They are selected by Mark Tarver on this
basis and are there to give advice. But in the event that Mark is dead or
incapacitated, they will elect people and make decisions based on majority
voting with the chairman having the casting vote. The committee will be about
six people and will be formed before the end of 2011.

14. _Will Shen always be $free and readable?_

Yes.

15. _Could you summarise the whole idea of the license in one sentence?_

Sure

Thou shalt not break the spec

Mark Tarver

July, 2011

